### Wimbledon: Analyzing AI-Generated Match Predictions
#### Abstract
Per IBM, Wimbledon [Match Insights w/ IBM Watson](https://www.ibm.com/uk-en/campaign/wimbledon) are:
> AI-powered fact sheets [that] use a combination of advanced analytics and AI to surface insights about every singles match. In these analyses, Watson not only predicts each player's Likelihood to Win, but also explains its reasoning by sharing the relevant Win Factors for each match.

Curious about how accurate the predictions were, I decided to analyze all match predictions. What I found was that the model correctly predicted 70.87% of match outcomes for the Gentlemen's Singles matches, and 62.20% of match outcomes for the Ladies Singles matches.

Over all Wimbledon matches (Ladies and Gentlemen Singles) the algorithm correctly predicted the winner 66.54% of the time.

#### Research Question
How accurate is the AI model being used to make match predictions?

#### Methodology
##### Dataset
After conducting a dynamic analysis of the network traffic generated by navigating to the [match insights](https://www.wimbledon.com/en_GB/matchinsights/index.html) landing page, I noticed two important files:
- [LS.json](https://www.wimbledon.com/en_GB/scores/feeds/2022/draws/LS.json)
- [MS.json](https://www.wimbledon.com/en_GB/scores/feeds/2022/draws/MS.json)

Static analysis of these two JSON files allowed me to extract two attributes that were important for the analysis of the actual predicted outcomes:

| Attribute  | Description |
| :---: | :---: |
| match_id | Unique identifier assigned to a single tennis match |
| winner | The actual winner of the tennis match |

From dynamic analysis I also learned that the actual predictions were stored in a separate (*match_id*.json) file.

| Attribute  | Description |
| :---: | :---: |
| win_prob_prematch | The *Likelihood to Win* value calculated for a single player for a single match |

##### Resources
All of the files used in my experiment have been conviently archived as a zip file: [Wimbledon Match Insight Files](wimbledon_insight_files.zip).

##### Tools
I created a [Wimbledon Match Insights Helper](wimbledon_match_insights_helper.py) script to help with keeping track of the actual winner so that I could compare that value with the predicted winner.

#### Results
```
Ladies predictions (127 matches):
    79 correct predictions (62.20%)
    48 incorrect predictions (37.80%)

Gentlemen's predictions (127 matches):
    90 correct predictions (70.87%)
    37 incorrect predictions (29.13%)

Gentlemen and Ladies predictions (254 matches):
    169 correct predictions (66.54%)
    85 incorrect predictions (33.46%)
```

##### Additional Notes
I noticed that the prediction for the Djokovic vs Sinner match (day 9) had been updated after I had pulled the original prediction. There may be other predictions that are different from the ones in [Wimbledon Match Insight Files](wimbledon_insight_files.zip).

The wimbledon_match_insights_1501.json file in the [Wimbledon Match Insight Files](wimbledon_insight_files.zip) archive contains the following likelihood values:

| Date of file download | match_id | Player | Likelihood to Win | wpi_rank |
| :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| 2022-07-04 | 1501 | N. Djokovic | 0.45240416870472966 | 4.0 |
| 2022-07-04 | 1501 | Y. Sinner | 0.5475958312952703 | 2.0 |

The current match insight [1501.json](https://www.wimbledon.com/clouddata/match-insights/2022/power-rankings/1501.json) contains the following likelihood values:

| Date of file download | match_id | Player | Likelihood to Win | wpi_rank |
| :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| 2022-07-14 | 1501 | N. Djokovic | 0.51 | 2.0 |
| 2022-07-14 | 1501 | Y. Sinner | 0.49 | 5.0 |

My hypothesis is that the discrepency is related to the difference in the calculated *wpi_rank*[^1] values:
> The IBM Power Index is the measure of a player's strength going into and throughout a tournament. The factors that contribute to IPI provide strong indicators as to who will win a head-to-head match...As its foundation, the IPI uses relevant industry punditry observed through thousands of news sources combined with player performance to create an index of a player's momentum...The win probability can shift day by day as the data around punditry and performance changes.

At some point in the future I'd like to find out if there are other files in the [Wimbledon Match Insight Files](wimbledon_insight_files.zip) archive that are out of sync with the files that were originally being served.

##### Additional References
[^1]: [How does the IBM Power Index work](https://developer.ibm.com/articles/trusted-ai-generated-content-at-the-2022-championships/?lnk=wmblp)
